Today I'm going to teach you how to
bench press a heavy weight. Teach you
how to warm up for a heavy bench press
session. How to unrackck the barbell
when you don't have a spotter. You how
to build pecs. I should be charging you
for this, but I'm not going to. All you
need to do is follow what I say because
I've been doing this for the last over
20 years. I learned how to bench press
from the best, the most technical
heavyweight bencher in the world. His
name is Kil Sachev. And I'm going to
teach you all of these tips that I
didn't know in the first 10 years of my
training. And it took me a long time to
actually learn how to bench press heavy.
And I'm going to teach you this from the
absolute beginning so you don't have to
go through all the mistakes that I went
through. I like to warm up with
dumbbells, high high reps. This is going
to be my first weight, which is going to
be it will be 75 kg. So I like to do
about 75 kg worth of dumbbell pressing
so that when I come to the barbell, um,
I'm already warm for that. The reason I
start with dumbbells is because it's
light, um, and it allows me to take my
shoulder joint through a longer range of
motion than the barbell. So have a look
at the way that I do it as well. I use a
neutral grip which is a lot more
comfortable for the shoulder joint and
it allows me to take the movement
through a much longer range of
motion. Very good for the shoulders to
be strong through a full range of
motion. And I'll be doing I don't know
20 or so repetitions. I'm not really
counting. Lots and lots of reps. And
then after I finish this, I'm going to
go and do the opposing muscle groups.
So, come and check this out. I love to
warm up my bench press with lat pull
down. And it's not just about training
the lats or anything like that. It's
mainly about taking the shoulder joint
through the range of motion that I'm
going to be using for the bench press.
So, the technique that I use for a bench
press is where I keep my shoulder blades
back and down towards my back pockets,
which is come behind me and have a look
at the technique that I use for the lat
pull down. The exact bottom
position. So, here, see that position?
So, this is relaxed for a lat pull down.
But then in a bench press, this is where
I keep my shoulder blades back and down
like you're going to be doing a lat pull
down. So, I'm
reinforcing that technique. So people
talk about pulling your shoulder blades
together. That's called retraction of
the scapula. But one of the most
important parts of a bench press for
shoulder health isn't just the
retraction. It's also the depression.
That's how we use our lats. Think about
increasing the distance between the
shoulders and our ears. So drop the
entire shoulder girdle. So you don't
want to be doing this. If you're
shrugging, your lats aren't on. If we're
depressing, this is how we use our lats
to hold our shoulder joint in place so
that we can lift a heavy weight. So the
lats, one of their roles, of course, is
is like these things like pulling down a
bar. So that's adduction, that's
extension. That's lat function.
Something else they do is this is a ball
and socket joint. So the head of this
bone here, which is the head of the
humorris, sits inside the shoulder
blade, the socket. And what the lats do
when they are active is they depress the
head of the humorus to allow more room
for that shoulder to move. So that's
another nice reason why we want our lats
on to maintain shoulder health through a
bench press. I'm going to go back and
forth between dumbbells and lat pull
downs up until I get to what's half of
uh 75 is 37 12 kg. So up until I get to
a 37 1/2 kg
Dumbbell
press. When I do proper training with
dumbbells, I'll have a control
eentric bang. But this is just warming
up. I'm just taking the joint through
the motion. Uh, when I come to the
barbell, I'll be using a more controlled
tempo as well, but this is rep work. Rep
work. It's not the exact technique that
I want to be benching with. Following
the same principles as your squat warm
up. Almost following the same principles
as my squat warm up. The only difference
is it's not quite the bench press. So,
this exercise, the lat pull down or the
dumbbell work, is not quite the bench
press. So when I do my squat warm up, I
try and use the exact technique from an
empty barbell to the top
weight the same way the whole way
through. So when I touch an empty
barbell, I'll try and think of the exact
same technique. And that's going to
happen when I touch the barbell, but
this isn't barbell work. So this is just
using other exercises to target the
muscles that I'm going to be using in
the bench press and warm up not just the
muscles, the joint through the full
range of motion. So, what did I just do?
30 kg. I'll be able to go 37.
I see you're using your knees a lot.
Take the weight. If you like that
technique that I used to hand the weight
to me, that's another cheat code. When I
do a flat bench, the rule is the flatter
the bench, the higher up your
thigh. Place the the dumbbells, right?
So, I'll show you in real time. I'll get
heavier ones so you can see. And I can
do this with the heaviest ones in here.
A mistake a lot of people make is they
have that too high here and they try and
throw the dumbbells to themselves and it
puts them off balance. On a flat bench
with dumbbells, have the dumbbells high
on your thighs and you're not using any
energy and it places the dumbbells
exactly where you need them to
start pressing. The rules change when
you do shoulders. Flatter the bench, the
higher up the thigh. The more incline we
go, the further down the thigh, closer
to the knee. So, for a shoulder press on
the knee so I can hand the dumbbell to
myself. There's one hack for you. Stop
asking me questions. I'm [__] need to
breathe, bro.
[__] Pre-workout long black with
honey. And this is my other drink today,
which is just tea with
honey. Could just be water. Usually, it
is just water with my electrolytes,
which I've also had today.
But I like sipping on a tea. Yeah, this
will be my last set. I'll go heavier and
heavier every
set. Okay, now my shoulders are warm and
they're ready to go. Unrackcking from
myself, it's a really hard thing. easy
thing to do when it's a light weight,
but when it gets heavier and heavier can
potentially take your shoulders out of
position, which has happened to me in
the past, and as a consequence, I tore
my pecs. The weight was 230 kg, which I
was able to
do. But what happens is when you
unrackck the weight, you pull your
shoulder blades out of position to
unrackck the weight. and then you're
laying on a bench and then to bring the
bar down, you want to be able to pull
the shoulder blades back in to
retraction as the bar comes to your
chest. But because you're laying on the
bench, it restricts your shoulder blades
from moving where they need to move. So
instead of having the shoulder blades
back in the bottom position, the
shoulder blades are out of position. And
when you bring the barbell down with the
shoulder blades out of position, the
shoulders aren't loaded correctly and it
puts uneven distribution on the muscles.
And that's when I tore my peg. So, I'm
going to teach you how to avoid that.
Sit at the edge of the bench. So, when
you lay down, you don't bump your head
on the barbell. From here, I slide back
so that I can bring my feet back and I
get on the balls of my feet. So, this is
a technique that everyone asks about
with up on the balls of the feet. I
thought I was I thought you're supposed
to have your feet flat or in
competition. Well, not all competitions
need a flat foot. Some of them do. Yes,
I'm not in the competition. I'm in the
gym. And this is the strongest way. up
on the balls of the feet so that I can
get leverage and push my heels
downwards. Okay? So, when I say heels
down, no, they don't touch the ground
because they're so far back. If they
weren't back, I can touch the ground.
But when I'm up on the balls of the
feet, I push down as hard as I can and
they won't touch the ground. But what I
do is initiate the arch in my lower back
so that it carries over to the arch in
my upper back. Are you ready? So, heels
down, slide into
position, right? See that? Watch my
chest height. My heels are relaxed. Now,
when I push my heels down, my chest
height raises because it increases my
arch. From here, big breath. Hold my
breath. Hold my breath for the whole
set. That is part of how I bench press.
Well, it is how I bench press, but I
just didn't tell you every cue. We're
going to do that step by step. Today's
session, my goal is to get 155 kg for
two sets of 10, which is good. It's
heavy, but technically it's my light
day. So, if you're following the
sessions that I have on the weekends
with big vasa. Last week, I did 180 kg
for four. That's my heavy day. So, I
like to do two times a week, one day
light with high reps, one day heavy with
lower reps. So, this is my light with
high reps. What I'm doing is started
with 75 and I'm going to go 20 kg jumps.
75, 95, 115, 135, 155. So here's a few
new cues for you. So remember doing the
same thing. Start at the edge of the
bench. Now what I want to do is I slide
back so that I can get my feet back into
position. Heels down. A lot of people
say come down to the barbells in line
with your eyes. I disagree with this.
That's too far down. That means you have
to reach too far back. So I like to say
barbell in line with like your mouth and
chin. So eyes behind the barbell so that
you don't have to travel so far back.
The further back you travel, the more
your shoulder blades have to come out of
position. I don't want him out of
position. So, eyes behind the barbell.
Barbell in line with your mouth. From
here, I use the bar to wedge my shoulder
blades back and down. I don't want to
take him out of position here. Now,
here's the next cue that is very
important for self unrackcking. There's
a technique that a lot of people teaches
to tuck the elbows and drag the weight
off weak. You can do that for a light
weight, but when you get to the maximum
loads, you will not be able to do it.
The way that you have to do it is elbows
under the bar. Okay. So, elbows must be
stacked under the bar from start to
finish from the unrackck and through the
entire rep. So, that is stacked. That is
strong. So, with the unrackck, don't try
and tuck your elbows. Flare the elbows
for the
unrackck. Externally rotate to tuck
them. That's how we bring the bar back.
And we've maintained that shoulder blade
position from start to
finish. That is the important cue. Start
with the elbows
flared. The way that we unrackck is we
lock the elbow out. So we don't push
with your shoulders. You push with your
triceps. So elbows flared. Extend the
elbow joint. Externally rotate. And then
we press away.
[Applause]
So that's
105. 105. I think I said all the numbers
wrong. 105. The next one's going to
be
125. No,
wrong. 115. Then it's going to be 135.
So I got one more warm-up set. 135 and
then we go
155, which will be our top set for the
day if I get it. I mean, the plan is 155
for 10. I should be strong enough for
it.
But, you never know. If I don't get 155
for
10, I'll be sad that I let you down cuz
I told you that I was going to do 155
for 10. But I'll tell you another tip
that I have with your programming. If
you followed two days ago, I did heavy
squats. So, heavy squats, especially low
bar, can cause elbow pain and bicep pain
and brachiialis pain, sore arms. In
other words, which means if you try and
bench press heavy the next day, your
arms aren't going to like you. What's my
solution to this? My solution is if you
to have two bench press days, make sure
that the light bench press day is
scheduled after squat day. I also
recommend have a day off straight after
squat day. So, my squats were Monday.
Yesterday was Tuesday. I did nothing.
Today's Wednesday. So, I believe that's
adequate recovery to come into my light
session. So, I wouldn't want to do my,
you know, heavy session this close to my
squats. That's torture for my arms. And
you're just not as
strong. Maybe I won't even be strong
enough to do the 155 for 10. That's my
point. That's my point. I mean, I should
be. I think I am. How long do I rest
between these
sets? When it's a light weight, I'm not
resting at all. Like, I just however
long it takes to to load the plates. But
then as it gets heavier and heavier, uh,
this is still pretty easy. Um, you know,
135 kg, I probably like to take about 3
or so minutes. Um, but this is my last
warm-up set. I'll probably take about 5
minutes after this to my first top set.
But then once I've done my first top
set, it's going to be a high RP. It's
probably going to be like a 9 RP, maybe
even 10. I don't know. Hopefully not 10.
But if it's a high RP like that for my
for me for my bench press, I like
anywhere between eight up to 10 minutes,
which some people think, you know,
you're going to cool down. Um, no, not
when I'm doing, you know, all out effort
with a weight that heavy. Um, if you're
not as strong, and when I was not as
strong, I wouldn't have taken 10
minutes. Yeah, it would have cooled me
down, but for this level, you know, 8 to
10 minutes. As for now, I'm well rested.
[Applause]
Just warm up. Yeah. Easy. Is it?
Remember, I know it's called a warm up,
but technically I'm already warm. I was
already warm by the time I came to the
first weight. But it's about teaching
the body what the heavier weights
incrementally what they feel like so
that my nervous system can accept it
when I unrackck 155
kg. So what I want is to unrackck 155
and it feels comfortable. So far so
good. I think uh I think 155 for 10 is
going to happen today. Feels good.
grip position, elbow position, bar
path. There's so many cues that you can
think of. Bar path. Let's talk about bar
path. The barbell objectively, if you to
look from side on, the barbell would
kind of come down. People call it a J
curve or whatever it might be. It
follows the elbow. So when we're tucking
the elbows, they're over the shoulder.
But then as we bring the bar down to our
sternum, there's slight tuck. So the
barbell must curve slightly. But in my
opinion, when people focus too much on
the curved bar path, they exaggerate it
and take it out of the line. So what I
actually teach people is to not think
about changing the bar path. Just think
about down and up and it will naturally
go where it's supposed to go. That is of
course if your body's moving correctly.
So what is correctly? Remember the
shoulder position that I taught you,
which is to pull the shoulder blades
back and down. When you pull the
shoulder blades back and down, that'll
create natural external rotation of the
upper armbbone, which will create
natural tucking of the elbows. So, I
don't teach people to tuck the elbows.
Uh, that's an important cue for a lot of
people, but I say if you're moving
correctly, the elbows will tuck where
they should go. So, that's that's with
me. Shoulders back and down, and the
elbows will just naturally go where they
want to go, which is a slight tuck. So,
have a look at where my elbows in
relation to my shoulders. start point
over the shoulders. When I bring the bar
down to my chest, it's, you know,
roughly about a 45 degrees of tuck and
then straight back
up. So there's there's the curve. What's
my advice again? Don't think about the
curve. Think down and up and the natural
curve will take its course.
[Applause]
That was
light. Set one
done. Easy peasy.
stronger than I thought actually. I
thought maybe it would be like I grind
out the 10th rep and one rep in or maybe
one rep in reserve, but I feel like I
had 12 on that. Maybe 13. I don't know.
You guys decide. Now, breath hold. Check
this out. Why do I hold my
breath? Did you see how I dropped the
barbell on my chest? So the more I fill
my belly and my body with air, the the
tighter my body will be and the less my
the barbell will sink into my chest. So
if I don't have a belly full of air, my
torso won't be tight. It'll be loose and
the barbell will drop really really far.
So there's reason number one. Reason
number two is check out the entire
position that I'm doing. The position
that I'm doing is, you know, feet back,
heels down. Let's talk about the entire
chain. heels down. Okay, look at this
bone here. That's hip joint
extension. Hip joint extension is paired
with anterior tilt of the pelvis. So
that's my pelvis going this way. So this
is posterior tilt like buttwink.
Anterior tilt is this way. And look at
how that influences my spine. When I
when I extend my hip and anterly tilt my
pelvis, it arches my back. What's the
next thing that happens when I arch my
back? So, watch this and you guys feel
it at home. Arch your back. Arch your
back. Arch your back. Feel where your
shoulder blades naturally go. That will
naturally come back into the position
that I want them to be in a bench press.
So, what's the opposite of that is
flexion. So, you guys feel it. So, bend
over. Don't think about your shoulders.
Just just round your upper back and tell
me where your shoulder blades went. So,
flexion is paired with protraction of
the scapula. Extension is paired with
retraction of the scapula and a few
other things. The next one is external
rotation. So
extension. So arching the back pulls the
shoulder blades back together and
externally rotates my arm. Right? So
this is what I mean by when the body is
moving correctly, the bar will just go
down its natural path. So if you're
doing all of these arches, that's what's
going to happen. Now, here's the next
thing that's paired with that is
inhalation. So, when I inhale, that's
going to increase my the size of my rib
cage and flare my ribs, which increases
the arch of my upper back. This is a
different type of brace that you'd want
for a squat or a deadlift. You want ribs
down in a squat and a deadlift, but you
want
ribs extended, ribs up in a bench press.
Now, when I when I do all of that,
that's what's holding my shoulders in
the right position and shoulder blades
retracted or or pulling my shoulder
blades back and down towards my back
pockets. When I
exhale, it's paired with the opposite of
that. Of course, you can try and hold
this in position and still breathe and
it doesn't force you to round that much.
However, it will drop your rib cage a
little bit. And when your rib cage drops
a little bit, your spine also goes a
little bit into flexion. When your spine
goes a little bit into flexion, your
shoulder blades go a little bit into
protraction. How many little bits of all
of that do you want when you're trying
to bench press the heaviest weight
possible? The answer is zero little
bits, please. And thank you. So, that's
why when I want to maximize my position,
maximize my strength, maximize
everything, that's why I'm holding that
position as tight as possible, and
that's why I don't even exhale in
between reps. I hold it from the
unrackck. So I
go and then I exhale on completion of
the rep. Yes, there is a risk. If you
have cardiovascular
issues, you could of course die. Um but
in my experience, you know, like this is
just like a um a warning, a disclaimer
like I'm not giving you the advice to do
that. All I'm telling you is what I do
and what I see many many highle benches
do. So most of the people that I'm
working with that I've ever worked with
that I've ever seen at the highest level
don't have that level of cardiovascular
disease. I'll tell you what's possible.
Uh usually with people with
cardiovascular disease in the elderly
population like the valva maneuver which
is the breathold and exerting force to
do their big last poo on the toilet has
been the cause of death for some people
like so it's definitely possible to die
from holding your breath and exerting
force to that degree. So therefore,
there's my disclaimer. Is it is it going
to happen to you? Probably
not. But I'm not telling you to do it at
the same time. So that's always the
question that I'm asked. Aren't you
going to die when you hold your breath
and all these things? Maybe. I don't
know. Haven't died yet. I hope I don't.
Fingers crossed. And I've never seen
anyone die from that.
The skeleton. Maybe that was the cause
of his
death. I don't know. He doesn't talk to
me.
Good one. Now, my secondary exercise is
going to be an incline dumbbell press.
Accessories. Here's the rule of
accessories. I just did a bench press,
which is a horizontal push plane. So,
that's on flat angle. So, don't go from
a flat angle and do more work just with
dumbbells on a flat angle again. So,
therefore, don't do flat dumbbell press
to complement your flat bench press.
It's kind of pointless. you're hitting
the muscles on the same angle, even
though there are some small differences.
So, that's why I always like to have
some slight difference with the angle
that I'm using. If you're following my
heavy session, you'll know that I do
heavy bench press and then I do a seated
shoulder press as my secondary. So,
that's why this is going to be another
angle that I'm not hitting there. So,
this is going to be uh an incline press
uh with a neutral grip. So, that's
another thing that I like to do with a
barbell. You're doing so much work in
the pronated grip. Why do more pronated
pressing when you've got the option to
move the dumbbells freely however the
shoulders want to put them? And here's
the funny thing. When we're doing a
barbell press, we're trying to tuck our
elbows anyway. So, if the hand was to
follow, it would be a somewhat neutral
position. So, it's, you know, a little
bit strange when people go come to the
dumbbells when they have got the option
to move it wherever they want and they
use that pronated
grip. So, that's why I like to use a
neutral grip. Um, I'm going to do one
warm-up set. Remember, I'm warm, but
it's just a slightly different angle.
So, I'm going to have a feel set. Maybe
I'll do um you know, 37 kg just because
it's conveniently the lightest one on
this table. I don't want to go straight
to the heavy one. So, I'll do this one
here just to feel it. Few reps. Um and
then I will come to maybe 55s
today. Remember the position. So, I'm
not on a flat press. So, I don't want to
have it really really high up on my lap.
And I'm not seated dumbbell shoulder
press. So I don't need it all the way on
my knees. So it's closer to my knees
now. Hand it to
myself. Neutral
grip. Neutral doesn't mean parallel
necessarily. It's just the the
comfortable angle. Full
stretch. Don't need to work hard on
that. That's just a feel
set
before I go to the 55s.
Question. Mhm. The belt. Ah, belts. So,
this is something for me. Um, you know,
I did heavy squats the other day, so I
don't really need to have the the belt
on for the deadlifts, but actually when
I'm bending over to grab these, that's
when the belt comes in handy. So, um,
when I'm doing a flat bench, I hold my
breath. Remember, I want my body to be
firm, and having the belt on makes my
body even firmer, so the bar doesn't
really sink so deep into my chest. But
when I'm doing dumbbells, realistically,
the only reason I'm using the belt uh is
just for the unrackck when I when I take
those heavy dumbbells off off here. So,
it doesn't really do a whole lot for my
dumbbell pressing, but it does for my
flat bench press. You're looking at me
in the mirror.
We had to clean the mirror as well. Do
you have a bench number you're working
on? Yeah, I do.
So, what I would like to do is get back
to 220 kg. Is that your best? No, my
best is 250. My best is 250, but I
weighed about 116 kg when I did that.
Right now, I'm 100. Um, actually, when I
competed the first time in the 100
class, I bench pressed 220. But there's
some differences. The difference is I
wasn't 100. I was 105 and I did a water
cut 24-hour weigh-in, weighed in at 100,
and then replenished, rehydrated, and I
was probably about 105 kg competing in
the 105 in the 100 class. That's what
people do with the 24-hour weigh-ins.
So, now I'm at legitimate 100 kg, but
still I would like to uh be able to get
back to 220 kg. I'd say right now I'm at
about 205ish. So 220, you know, like
it'll be logical for me to say my goal
is 210, but 210 is kind of like one of
those non- numbers, you know, 220,
that's not a non- number. That's five
blue plates, you know. So that's why
that's my goal. Five blue plates aside.
Can I do that? I've done it before. Not
at this body weight, though. So that
would be a bodyweight PB, actually. Um,
so that's the number. How far away am I?
Couple months. Not there yet. Not there
yet. Couple of months of good training,
good dieting. Okay. Does diet affect
your train? Absolutely. Diet absolutely
affects my training. And to be honest
with you, when I say good dieting, I
think to get 220 again, I think I might
need to get my body weight back up to
105. You know, because that's what I
would do if I was to compete again,
which I might compete in the 100 class.
So, I would like to, you know, eat well
and do a clean bulk to 105. Uh, what
does clean bulk mean? clean bulk
compared to dirty bulk. Dirty bulk is I
could very easily get to 105 kgs if I
just ate burgers and pizzas and fast
food and high calorie food. Um that
would just make me a big fat s. But a
clean bulk would be a slower process
with nutritious food unprocessed
hopefully. And um of course that's going
to be a lot harder. You'd still have to
put on like to put on 5 kgs in a year.
You can't do that with muscle. Um you'd
have to still put on some type of fat.
Fine. Um, but if I did it with um, you
know, shitty processed food and pizzas
and and burgers, it' be, you know, 1
kilogram of muscle and 4 kg of fat. This
way, if it's a clean bulk, it'll be like
2 and a half kilograms of muscle and 2
and a half kilograms of fat. Of course,
the nutritionists at home are saying,
"Oh, you haven't counted in the water
and all that stuff?" Yes, water as well.
So, maybe 2 kilos of 2 kilos of muscle
in a year for me, that's a good year if
I eat really, really well. And then the
rest will be, you know, water and fat.
So, I think that's what I realistically
need to be is 105 to get to a a 220
bench again. And, you know, I think I'd
like to compete. And that's what I'd
want to hit if I was to compete. I'd
want to hit a 220 bench. You know, maybe
a 310 squat. Um, how old are you again?
Huh? How old are you? I'm 43 years old.
Yeah. Someone mentioned in the comments
after I did I didn't even know this, but
they said, um, I did a 285 unequ squat.
Um, and that's 10 kg off the Australian
record. I don't even know what the
Australian record is. Um, but I don't go
for that. That's a mast's record is what
they said for my age. I don't like that.
I don't want to go for a mast's record.
That record sucks. I want to do the open
record. So, if it's not an open record,
it's not a record. So, um, but anyway, I
don't know if it's going to be hitting
any records, but these are just numbers
that I think I can do. I think I can get
to about a 310 squat. I think I can get
to a 220 bench. And I think I can do,
you know, 330 kg deadlift in this class.
You know, if I get those numbers again,
I'll do a comp. All right, let's go. 55
kg. Yeah, I should be able to do this
for 12.
You know, that's the hardest part is is
putting it back. See how awkward it is?
That's why I have the belt
like
Anyway, set number one. I'll do one more
set of
12 and then we'll do some back work. My
breathing is different for a dumbbell. I
don't need to hold that arch position.
So, the idea of holding my breath for
the bench press is when I'm maintaining
that position because I don't want to be
pulled out of that position, but because
I'm not arching, I mean, there's some
arch, but it's not the same exaggerated
arch because I don't need to hold that
position with dumbbells, I don't need to
hold my breath.
So, yeah, I'll I'll exhale. I'll reset
my breath in between each rep. So, the
flat bench press is the only exercise
that I personally don't recommend, but I
just do it. That's the only exercise
that I hold my breath for the whole set.
I do not hold my breath for an entire
set of squats unless it's just one rep
or deadlifts or anything that I'm
standing. So, that's um one of those
things when people faint, they need the
blood in their head. So that's why the
body naturally knows pass out and you'll
end up on the floor and then that's
where the blood starts circulating in
your head again and then you wake up. So
that's why when I'm laying down in a
bench press there's blood flow in my
head and and I don't pass out. But if
you're standing um you can very easily
pass out if you're holding your breath
for multiple reps. So there's a tip for
you at home. If any of your friends are
passing out during their lifts, don't be
a good friend and hold them upright.
They want to lay down. They want to get
blood to their head. Lay them on the
down. Lay them on the floor
carefully. Lay them on the down. Lay
them on the floor. Lay them on the
floor, not on the down. Okay. So, what's
next? I want complete strength in all of
my pushing muscles. There is one muscle
that I've neglected and that is one of
the heads of the triceps. Right? So a
lot of people ask the question um is it
enough to just do compound exercises is
that enough to build your arms?
Technically no. The nature of the biceps
and
triceps is the biceps and one head of
the tri the long head of the triceps are
barticular muscles. So they cross two
joints. So what does that mean? When we
do like a heavy
press, shoulder joint flexion, so that's
shoulder doing this way and elbow
extension are conflicting actions of the
tricep. The tricep wants to go extension
extension, not flexion extension. So the
length of that long head of the tricep
doesn't change. So it's not very good to
build the long head of the triceps. So
if all you do is compound pressing for
triceps work, you are not getting the
most out of the long head of the
triceps. Same applies for biceps because
the biceps cross the shoulder joint.
They flex the elbow and they flex the
shoulder. And when you're doing a row,
it's ex it's flexion of the elbow, but
then it's extension of the shoulder,
which is conflicting actions. So, if you
want proper
biceps, don't just do rows, pull-ups,
and pull downs. You need to
incorporate isolated elbow flexion work
for biceps. So, if you want complete
pushing strength development, you know,
this is all plain. So you go, you know,
horizontal, you know, that's 45, but I
also include upright. So you go
horizontal push, vertical push, and then
triceps. That is complete. All of the
pushing muscles done. So next up, tricep
extension with my favorite tricep
extension exercise, skull crusher. Does
the tricep size or strength help you
with the bench? Of course it does
because it's one of the pressing
muscles. Now, this also depends how you
press. Now the wider the grip usually if
you look at the best benches in the
world and you see wide grip bench
presses they don't use as much of their
tricep as the closer grip presses. So if
you see people see what I'm saying is
you know like I usually say the
strongest grip the most efficient
position for a bench press is the on the
outer ring. So that's the the widest
grip possible. And then people say
things like oh what about and I'll give
you some examples. Uh Julius Maddox
doesn't hold it out there. Well look at
his arch. He's also not arching. I don't
know this as a fact, but I bet you he
probably feels that it's uncomfortable
to hold it wide because he doesn't arch.
Remember the rule. If you don't arch,
it's not going to be comfortable to hold
it wide. And I know that that's why. Not
sure if he knows that or if he's said
that or anything. That's just my own
speculation. Uh but someone else that I
consider, a fellow by the name of uh
Jeremy Horn Hornster. I don't know how
to pronounce his name. He's a 110 kg
bench presser with around the 300 kg raw
bench press mark. It could be more than
that. I don't know the exact numbers.
That's the best in the world in that
weight class. I think I think there's
another fellow Tomelloo. I don't know
how to pronounce his name either. I
think he may even be better than him at
the moment. But anyway, Jeremy Hornster,
close grip. Again, he doesn't use that
wide grip. He's using a very different
technique to what I use. Look at the
size of that guy's triceps. So, the
closer the grip, the more demanding it
is on the triceps. If you use a wide
grip, you probably don't use the triceps
as much. However, it is still one of
those pushing muscles and having strong
triceps, strength is never a weakness,
as Mark Bell says. So, it's not going to
make you weaker to have strong triceps,
but in my opinion, um if you're a
technical bencher, especially if you use
a wide grip and a big arch, you
technically all you need to do is just
do more benching and more pressing um
and you will continue to move forward in
your bench press without having to do
accessory tricep work. But, uh that's
not me right now. I like to add triceps
because I don't want to exclude any of
my muscles. I want all of my muscles to
be strong. So that's why I'm including
it. Uh and also it doesn't hurt. It's
not going to make me weaker. I know that
for sure. Scull press, scal, I don't
know. Call it what you want. You know
what it is. So it's easy bar. Uh that's
a nice comfortable position compared to
compared to a straight bar. All right.
So I'm going to hold it on on this grip
here. Now, what I'm going to be focusing
on
is, you know, when my my shoulder is
directly here, this is stacked and
there's no load being placed on the
tricep. So, in the bottom position, I
want my arm to always be slightly
backwards, which increases the tension
on the triceps from start to finish. So,
that's a bit of a bodybuilding trick.
So, if I want to relax my tricep, I'll
bring my arm stacked so there's no load
being placed on the muscle. So, that's
me resting if you ever see that
happening. So, what I want to do is keep
it back and maximize elbow bend. So,
whether elbows are poked out or in, it
doesn't really matter as long as you're
getting full amount of elbow joint
flexion. All right? So, um, how do we
know that? If you at the bottom
position, if you put a a pen here and
let go of it, the pen would be stuck
here between your bicep and your
forearm. Let's have a look if that's the
case with me. So, arms back and I bring
it back. Bend the elbows. Keep them
back. Bend the elbows. And I don't go
over here. So that's my arms rested. See
that? So I keep them back. There's
tension on the triceps. Bend the elbows
maximally. Keep the tension. Keep the
tension. Keep the tension.
I don't know how many reps that
was. Do you train to failure or not? So,
this is a a discussion that I had with a
good friend of mine the other day and I
often give rules of, you know, the whole
session needs to be conservative. Don't
go to fail. Well, it depends on the
exercise. So, for big exercises like the
start of the day, I don't want to take
that to fail. That's very energy
consuming. It's hard to recover from and
it's hard to progress from from week to
week, right? But then we come to
isolation exercises. Like this is hard,
but it's an isolation exercise. What do
you think's going to happen if I take
this to failure? Probably not much. Like
it's not really hard for me to recover
from, right? So taking a isolation
exercise to failure. I'm all for it. I
still want to allow room to be able to
progress from week to week, but I think
I'll be able to. I think I'll be able to
add 2 and 12 kg each side. Maybe I'll do
less reps. Totally fine. That's totally
fine. But the main movements, so the
bench press and that applies to like if
you're doing big squats and deadlifts or
big compound movements. I don't
recommend take them to failure. Leave
rep or three, you know, one, two, three
reps in reserve. That's really, really
good. That's enough for adequate
stimulation and skill work and strength
development. But then when you're doing
isolation exercise, send it. Take it to
failure. You know, within reason. Look
at the rep range that I did. I didn't do
like a heavy single on a isolation
exercise. That's silly. It's not enough
stimulation. So, high rep work, take it
to failure. Walk out of the session with
a big tricep pump. There's my
recommendation to you. I'll do one more
set and then we'll do some back.
Why do you do back?
Uh, it's just how I've always trained.
Um, you know, I can do back on a
separate day. Now, this is how I've
always trained. I'll normally superset
push with pull and that saves me time.
So, I'll tell you a secret about
supersets. You don't get superior
results with supersets. It just saves
you time, right? So, one way of doing it
for strength is called opposing muscle
supersets. So, I prescribe and I used to
do for myself like a bench press and
then wait a couple of minutes set of
rows or pull downs and then back and
forth between those. Right? So, instead
of doing what I did today, which was
bench press, wait 8 minutes, bench
press, you know, and then and then a
long rest, that takes a long time. So,
um, an efficient way of doing it is
bench press, wait four minutes, lat pull
down, four minutes, come back to the
bench press, four minutes. So, that's
called opposing muscle supersets, which
is great for saving time in the gym, but
that's all you're doing is really saving
time, which is important for a lot of
people, but for me, uh, you know, this
is my job. I'm very lucky um that this
is my job and I don't need to save time.
Um, I can have a 2-hour session if I
want, which is typically how long these
sessions are. But if I needed to be in
and out real quick, I'd be super setting
between the two. Now, here's the next
thing. If I was competing or if I was
coaching someone who was competing, I
wouldn't superset. So, I wouldn't do a
heavy bench press. I'd make them rest
for the long duration because although
it's not hugely fatiguing to do opposing
muscle group superset, it still creates
some central fatigue. So, it does make
you a little bit tired and it can
slightly negatively impact your main
work. So, if it was training someone for
competition, I'd probably do the bench
press or the competition lift as a
standalone. And then I would do the
accessories. I would have typically done
the dumbbell presses, superset that with
pull downs or rows or whatever the
opposing muscle group is. And then I'd
go the tricep extension and I'd pair
that with bicep curls. Like that's a
really efficient way of training. But
that's all the research shows us now. It
doesn't make you stronger than if you
didn't superset. All it does is saves
you time, which is a great thing. But
some people, they've got all the time in
the world. uh which is kind of me. I
don't have all the time in the world.
After two hours, I get pretty hungry.
So, I don't want to be training for
longer than two hours. Uh but right now,
let's go and do
back. This is my favorite back building
exercise, right? So, see this grip? This
is one of those mag grips. Lots of
different brands. Not sponsored by
anyone, but these are really nice and
comfortable. So, this is kind of like
neutral width and it's a little bit
pronated, which is a really nice
comfortable angle for me. Now, the way
that I do my lat pull downs is a very
complete upper back building exercise.
So, you got two ways that I say is like
if you're really really vertical and
have the elbows down, that's where it
really targets the lats. I'll show you.
So, really vertical, elbows down, that's
real a lot of focus on the lats. And
then the next way, which is the way I
like to do it, is slightly leaning back
so that we allow for some focus on
shoulder blades coming back and down. So
they're two slightly different ways,
slightly different emphasis, but in my
opinion, I'll always want to make sure
I'm targeting the midback muscles. I
don't really care to have the big lat
look. I don't really care. like, yeah,
this strengthens the hell out of my
lats. But when I train, like a
bodybuilder might really want to focus
on isolating the lats, but whenever I'm
training a strength athlete, I say, why
not get complete upper back development?
So lats with the middle back muscles.
Um, so whenever I do my rows, pull-ups,
and pull downs, that's the technique I
want, which is full stretch, shoulder
blades back and down. Full stretch,
shoulder blades back and down. Right? So
that's me now slightly leaning back. Not
too much, just a little bit. Full
stretch. Shoulder blades back and down.
Yeah, that's the cues. Full stretch.
Shoulder blades back and down. So the
next thing as well, so look at my
shoulders. So this is a problem that a
lot of people do is that whole thing of
when they pull the bar to the chest,
they go. So the lats roll is to drop the
entire shoulder girdle. Right? So that's
elevation. That's depression. You can't
elevate and depress at the same time. So
if you're bringing the the bar down and
your shoulder comes up like this, you're
not using your lats as best as you can.
Right? So that's what you really want to
focus on for two reasons. Shoulder
strength but also shoulder function.
Right? So learning how to drop the
entire shoulder girdle. Pick the chest
up towards the bar. Full stretch. Of
course the shoulder girdle comes up
here. But as you're bringing it down,
drop the entire shoulder girdle.
Shoulder blades back and down towards
the back pockets.
I don't know how many reps that was.
That was maybe I don't know a couple of
reps in reserve, but I will go heavier
on the next set. I think people should
have paid for this. Yeah, I know. This
is like fully unpaid session. You didn't
have to pay me though. You're welcome.
This is stuff that I wish I knew when I
started, you know, like the first I've
been a coach for this is probably about
23 years now. Long time. Um the first 10
years of that I thought I knew a lot but
I didn't really know a hell of a lot.
Like I look back at back then it's like
oh I cringe at some of the stuff that I
used to do. But that's right. Um I had
to learn all of these things. It took me
a long time to learn these things. And
you know this is kind of like my mission
I guess is to teach people all the [__]
that I didn't know. Like I'm pretty
strong but I didn't start off pretty
strong. I just worked hard you know
learned along the way. Learned a lot
along the way and was kind of like
obsessed um with just I just always
wanted to be stronger. Anyway, I'd have
saved so much time if I knew all of this
when I first started, but I didn't. So,
now you guys know. So, if you're a a
newbie, if you're a beginner in the gym,
my first bench press was 30 kg for eight
reps, and I wanted to get more. I was 16
years old. All of my friends were doing
40 kg for eight. I was like, "Oh, yeah."
They said, "Oh, it's your first time.
Just do 30." I was like, "Easy, you
know, and I couldn't do more than eight
reps." And I was so embarrassed. So, I
was on a mission from then. and it was
like the weakest out of all of my
friends. They had been training for a
little bit longer in all fairness, but
from then on it was like, "No, I don't
ever want that to happen again." So, I
trained hard uh from then, you know, but
I wasn't genetically gifted or anything
like that. I was just obsessed with kind
of like being better with all the groups
that I was in. So, out of my friend
group, I wanted to be stronger than
them, you know, and then when I joined
Fitness First, I wanted to be the
strongest at Fitness First. That was a
commercial gym that I started at. And
then, you know, commercial gym at
Fitness First, I figured out after a few
years when I got to be the strongest
there that they weren't very strong when
I learned what the Australian records
were. So then I want to be the
strongest. So that was kind of like my
mission the whole way, you know? So
there's the cliche saying, if you're the
strongest person in the room, you're in
the wrong room. So I was always held
back by my my ceilings that were my own
limitations that weren't set very high.
So now they're quite high and I am very
strong but I actually think I'm quite
weak because I am now comparing myself
to the best in the world who are very
very strong. However, however I still
know I am strong and I know that the
techniques that I use I've learned from
the best and I've taught the best. They
work. Of course there are many ways to
skin a cat. But this way works as well.
Right? I promise you and you can use it
and I'm asking you for nothing. Just go
and use it. That's what I'm asking you.
Go and succeed. All right. Let's do it
again. Next set. A little bit heavier.
I missed it. You missed it. That's okay.
It was more of the same. Now, we're
going to go on to the next exercise. So,
that was a vertical pull. Now, I'm going
to do one of my favorite um shoulder
health exercises. So, this is a face
pull. So, that was a vertical pull. I
guess you could say this is a horizontal
pull. Uh I'll show you the way that I do
this. um you know I take a seat on the
floor and I pull it to the top of my
head. So pulling pulling it to my neck.
So that's one way of doing it. Pulling
it to the neck is really focusing on
squeezing the shoulder blades together
which is midback. So romboids, middle
trapezius and rear deltoids. But then
the next technique is face pulls to the
top of the head. So there is midback.
But then when we do that component
that's external rotation. So we're
strengthening some of our rotator cuff
muscles. um which is good for healthy
shoulders. Now here's the technique. I
prescribe these for a lot of people and
they do it standing and I look at it
it's like you know fair enough you want
to do it standing but it is so much
weaker when you do it standing. Feel it
like you know like you know I'm using my
strength to stabilize my body. I don't
even want to do it. So sit down. Sit
down. This is so much stronger.
So the cue here is bring it high on your
head and think about pulling those
handles
apart. And this is one of those
exercises where you can do, you know,
15, 20, 25. If you go too heavy, it's
not really stimulating.
[Music]
I don't know how many reps that was.
Normally I count, I promise. But I'm
talking to you guys, so I'm losing
count, but I just go till, you know, I
feel like there's not many repetitions
in reserve. You can take that to fail if
you want. It doesn't really matter. It's
such a light weight. I'll go heavier on
the next set. It's such a light weight
that if you take it to fail, people say
don't take those movements to or any
movements to fail because you're going
to injure yourself. You're not going to
injure yourself by, you know, doing a
set of 20 and then technique breaks down
at the last set, the last rep. That's
not going to happen. So, once again,
it's one of those
exercises. You can train closer to fail
and you'll recover and you won't risk
injury and it's totally fine. One more
set and then I'm going to do some
biceps. Curls. Get the curls.
Is that a girl? Boys get the guys.
Yeah. I don't know if that's a boy or
girl.
Non-binary. It's a they I don't know. I
can't see any genitals. I can't see if
it's got a willie. It's got no
willie. All right. One more set.
Almost done. We got one more exercise.
Check out the rear
delts. Do I have big delts? Thanks for
noticing. You see it? Not bad. Thanks,
bro. Thanks, bro. I train them. I train
them. All right. Next up, last exercise
of the day. Biceps. Girls. Get the
girls.
I'm going to do some easy bar curls.
It's just one of my one of my ones, you
know, it's just my favorite. Now,
everyone's got different proportions and
ratios. I'd say biceps are probably on
me, not not probably. They're definitely
not as strong as my triceps. So, it's
another reason why I don't Sometimes I
do, but sometimes I don't. A lot of
times I don't superep between biceps and
triceps. I write the program to use the
easy bar curls. So, you alternate
between an easy bar scalp crush to an
easy bar bicep curl back and forth. But
for me, I'm a lot stronger with my
tricep extensions than I am with my
bicep curls. So, if I am pairing these
ones, I'll either have to set up two
bars, which I don't have, or
choose slightly different exercises, or
just separate it. Triceps as a
standalone, and biceps as a
standalone. This is a mechanical drop
set. So, what I'm going to do is start
with reverse curls, right? I love a
reverse curl. It strengthens your
forearms. So, those are one of those
muscles that kind of just look good if
you have strong forearms. Strengthens
your forearms. And also the reverse grip
kind of takes your biceps out of the
equation and it hits the brachialis
which sits underneath it. And then when
you fatigue that structure, then drop
it, turn it, and now we hit biceps that
is a stronger position and it allows us
to really hit every head of the elbow
flexors. So there's not just so when
people say bicep curls they think that's
just the only muscle but it's biceps
brachioraiialis and brachiialis. So
three main flexes but also the muscles
of the forearms. You ready? Yeah
bro
ready. Not a long rest.
I'll do another set of that. Uh, and
then we're done. That's my session.
That's a big session today. Um, really
good session. I think you got a ton of
value from all the technique, the way I
structure my training. Um, and just copy
what I do and that's totally fine. Leave
a comment below if you want me to talk
about anything else on the next session.
That's all. Thanks for watching. Click
like, subscribe. See you next time.
Dude, I'm [__]